[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The year, 1934, and
America, deep in the throes
of a crippling depression, is
captivated by an ugly custody
battle for poor, little rich
girl, Gloria Vanderbilt,
and her $5 million inheritance.
In one corner, her high
living socialite mother.
In the other, her concerned
aunt Gertrude Whitney.
And in the middle,
jeered at by crowds,
hounded by the press, a
lonely 10-year-old girl.
And while her aunt
Gertrude may have won,
Gloria was a little girl lost.
>> Gloria Vanderbilt, once storm
center of a sensational court
battle, is going on 13 now.
>> Passing isolated adolescence
before escaping into an abusive
marriage at just 17 years old.
Gloria would marry two more
times, to conductor Leopold
Stokowski and
director Sidney Lumet,
before finding her true love,
screenwriter Wyatt Cooper.
With Cooper and sons,
Anderson and Carter,
she created the family she'd
spent a lifetime searching for.
At the same time,
she enjoyed success
as a painter and a writer.
But Gloria's happiness
was short-lived.
In 1978, she lost Wyatt after
a series of heart attacks.
In characteristic style, her
pain did not keep her down.
Gloria poured her
energies into what
would become her most unlikely,
but wildly successful venture--
blue jeans.
>> These pants fit
you everywhere.
>> By the late '70s, Gloria's
trademark swan was in more
American women's closets with
her jeans outselling every
other brand.
And then, once again,
the unthinkable.
In July 1988, with
Gloria watching,
her son Carter disoriented,
confused, crept out
on the ledge of their
penthouse balcony
and jumped 14
stories to his death.
This time, Gloria
dealt with her pain
by writing "A Mother's
Story," a tale of loss
focusing not just on Carter,
but the myriad losses
experienced just in living.
>> I never do anything or
approach anything without
believing it's going to
be absolutely successful.
I don't hesitate.
And I mean, the minute you do,
you'd end up doing nothing.
>> Conversely, its message
is hopeful, strong,
and pure Gloria.
No matter how terrible
the loss, no matter
how much you think you can't
go on, you can, you should,
you must.
>> In your most remarkable
book, "A Mother's Story,"
you begin with the words, "Some
of us are born with a sense
of loss.
It's not something we acquire.
It is with us from
the very beginning.
And it pervades us for
the rest of our lives."
I think that's true.
Some of us are born
with a sense of loss.
>> Well, it's true of me, yes.
>> What does it mean for you?
What does that loss feel like?
>> Well, I think it really
comes from not having a father,
and my mother, who was
very elusive and really
wasn't there.
And therefore, you are forever
trying to replace it, find it.
And it's just an irrevocable--
loss is the thing that is
the most motivating thing
in my life and always
has been, and trying
to replace that
loss, trying to find
something that will assuage it.
>> What were some of the ways
that you tried to fill that
hole?
>> Well, I never, ever--
one of the qualities and
the traits that I hate more
than anything is self-pity.
And I certainly never had that.
And I don't respect
people that do.
But I always felt that I
was trying to find something
that I didn't have.
And then, of course,
as one develops,
and if you live long enough,
you find that, in a sense,
you become your own mother
and your own father.
But that takes a
long, long time.
>> It does.
>> That doesn't come
early or easily.
But it certainly is the point
that I've really reached now.
I don't have that--
well, loss is the thing
that still is the thing that
obsesses me most, and that I
think about most in my writing,
that I'm trying to
find in my work,
I try to find in a love
affairs, one tries to find.
>> One of the things you
wrote that resonated with me
for so long was with each
successive loss in your life,
it became more familiar.
>> Oh, yes.
>> And it was almost
a relief, you said.
>> Yes.
Yes.
I can deal with loss very
easily because I've been there
and I'm familiar with it.
And when it comes, it's almost
oh, yes, this is something
that I can really
handle and that I
can function with because
I've been there before.
>> There's sort of a
fascination with it too.
It's almost like
when you're a child,
you fall and you skin your knee.
And your mother says,
don't touch the scab.
And you can't help it,
it's so fascinating to you.
>> I think that is true.
I was talking the other
day with my son Anderson
and we were talking
about two relationships
that I have in my life.
And Anderson said, well, mom--
these are not the
names of the people--
why would you want
to be happy with John
when you can be
miserable with Bill?
So this is sort of
in the same genre
for what we're talking about.
>> And what was your answer?
>> Well, I thought
about it a lot.
And I thought, really,
what is it that I want?
Do I want that feeling
of being miserable which
is, of course, also a
feeling of loss and all that.
Or do I want to be happy?
Interesting question.
>> It is a fascinating
question, my new friend.
It is a fascinating
question because I
think we do have a
tendency to do that.
There are people who go to
the familiarity of pain.
>> My mother, who I'm
endlessly obsessed with,
and to this day I'm
obsessed with her,
and she was the most
elusive, beautiful,
like a butterfly that I tried to
catch and I couldn't and I was
always chasing her.
>> Isn't it interesting, the
relationship between a mother
and a daughter, because
on so many levels,
they are who we
model ourselves--
>> Well, it's "My Mother/My
Self" is Nancy Friday.
>> Nancy Friday's book.
Yes.
--because in some cases,
they represent everything
that we draw away from
that we don't want to be.
And in some cases,
they are everything.
>> Well, I have friends
who have daughters
and their relationship, it's
so tempestuous and they go
through-- and I never really had
that because I really never had
my mother.
The custody case
happened when I was nine.
And then I didn't see her
again for a long time.
So my role models were
really movie stars.
I was obsessed with the movies.
Katharine Hepburn was somebody
that was sort of a role model.
And I thought,
oh, I wish she was
my mother, that kind of thing.
>> You made headline
lines when you were what?
6, 7, 8 years old with
that custody battle?
>> Yes.
>> You know, there are pictures
of you where even then,
there's a sadness about you.
There's a sense of loss in
pictures of you as a little--
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> --little girl.
Were you aware of the loss then?
>> Well, I was so
happy with my--
I had a wonderful nurse who was
really a mother image to me.
And then I was
separated from my nurse,
my nanny, which was
really, absolutely
was the worst thing that
had ever happened to me.
But until then, I was happy.
And I often think, in looking
back on my custody case,
if Mrs. Whitney,
my aunt Gertrude,
had only taken
the money that she
spent on the lawyers
and various other things
and given it to my mother, who
would have been happy, I think,
to go to Europe and live,
and let me stay with my aunt
and had my nurse
stay on, and then
eventually, my
mother and I would
have gotten to know each other.
That would have really
been the solution to it.
>> It's a strange thing,
isn't it, how as time passes,
even though they're not around,
that's when we get to know
and understand our mothers?
>> Oh,well, well, my
relationship with my mother
keeps changing every day.
>> Today, even?
>> Absolutely.
>> How is it changing?
>> And I think about
her all the time.
Well, I understand
her better, more.
I feel that way
about my grandmother.
I feel that way about
the nurse I had.
And I feel that way
about Leopold Stokowski,
who has died, and who
I was very much in love
with and very close to
at one time in my life.
But my relationship with--
it keeps changing all the time.
>> What is your relationship
with your mother today?
Is she someone you love?
>> Oh, yes.
>> Is she someone you forgive?
>> I would love to see her
and have her in my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> While Gloria Vanderbilt was
born into a family of wealth,
prestige, and power, her
life was never an easy road.
Informed at every turn by loss--
of her father, her mother,
her true love, her child.
Through it all, she did
hold onto one thing--
faith-- in herself
and in a higher power.
>> You must have an enormous
amount of faith in your life.
>> Oh, yes.
Absolutely.
>> How would you define
your faith today?
I think we all have different
definitions of spirituality,
of the road we walk down
that centers us, focuses
us, and allows us to have
an essential conversation
with God.
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> How do you define
your faith today?
>> Well, I'm very fatalistic.
And I believe that
everything is preset.
And if you believe
that, it frees you,
because it's going
to happen the way
it happens, and it's not going
to happen in any other way.
And this is something
that gives me great--
I also don't believe that
this is the real life,
and that this is just the
transition to something which
is going to be much better.
>> I love that.
I love that.
>> Much, much better.
And don't ask me how I
know it, I just know it.
>> I won't.
I won't ask you, because
you know-- and I'll tell you
why I won't ask
you, because I think
that's what faith
is, just knowing.
>> Absolutely.
>> It's just a knowingness.
So you believe things
are choreographed for us.
>> Absolutely.
>> You believe that there are
better things and a better
place coming.
Do you pray?
>> Yes.
>> All the time?
>> I pray-- what I really pray
is I thank the divine mother
for what I have, and my health,
and that my children are OK,
and my friends.
And I don't ask for things.
>> No.
>> I just thank for what I have.
>> A very wise, holy person said
to me once that the best way
to pray is not in supplication,
asking for things,
but in gratitude.
>> Yes.
Well, that's what I believe too.
Absolutely.
>> If America has royalty,
people would say royalty--
Kennedys, the Vanderbilts.
>> Well, that
embarrasses me very much.
>> I'm sure it does.
>> I don't know, that's--
>> Well, it might, but
people would say that.
So I would ask you,
what does it feel
like to have that
kind of celebrity?
To be watched?
To be studied?
To be scrutinized all your life?
What does it feel like?
>> When the custody case
happened, and I was nine,
I got an enormous
amount of publicity.
And I decided--
I don't know whether I
articulated it as I do now--
but I just thought, I
don't want to read anything
about myself because I want
to make something of my life.
And I rarely do read
anything about myself.
>> Really?
>> Really.
And I don't think of myself--
I don't read
reviews of my books.
I don't read interviews.
I may look at this
interview, I may not.
No, because the
minute you do it--
I like to keep clear.
>> Well, then let
me ask you this,
do you believe that there is
a consciousness of celebrity?
And by that I mean,
a responsibility
that you have to
have, an awareness,
because a lot of
the things you do
are watched by people,
the direction you take.
And people take a
lot of direction
from what you do because
you are in the public eye.
How do you behave responsibly
because your name has never
been in the mud?
And you've been a
celebrity for a long time.
>> Well, I don't again,
think really in those terms.
I just couldn't do what I do
any other way than the way
that I do it, and
the way I live.
And I don't think--
see, I don't see myself
as a celebrity if--
>> I see.
>> --you want to use that word.
>> All right.
>> One of the things that
getting that kind of publicity
as a child that is, I think,
difficult is that people do--
it casts a long shadow.
You hear that name, or that--
and there's a
preconceived sort of thing
that follows the person.
And it really takes your whole
life to become someone worthy
of self-respect as a person,
not with that shadow of--
around you.
>> There's a wonderful American
actor by the name of Robert
Loggia.
And he was telling me a
story about years ago.
He said, you know, I
auditioned for a play,
"Orpheus Descending,"
with Gloria.
And he said, we were
both very young.
She walked onto the stage
and the stagehand stopped,
and the director stopped, and
the other actors auditioning
stopped.
And he said,
Chantal, I don't know
how to tell you except she
had a presence about her.
>> Well, I don't know
whether he remembers this,
but Tennessee Williams--
we were auditioning for--
and Tennessee was
the terror of actors
because he would always
sit like in the second row
and he would talk throughout
the actors' auditions.
And that's really the
only thing I remember.
So if he thought I had
presence dealing with that,
and he certainly did.
So but that's very, very funny.
>> I will remind him.
>> Tennessee really was,
he was just a terror.
He would always have somebody,
an assistant or something,
and he would be talking,
talking, talking, talking
through the audition.
>> Now you see what you've done?
You've successfully taken
the subject off of you
and your remarkable presence.
What do you think it is
when someone has presence?
>> Well, I think you probably,
if you've got it, you know it.
And therefore, it
projects itself.
You know, there's
this wonderful thing
about Marilyn Monroe, which
I'm sure you've heard this,
but she could be--
I remember I had a party one
night and Marilyn was there.
And it was in the
days when she had
come to be in the Actors
Studio and all that.
And she was going around
without any makeup on.
And she came to the party.
And she had on a sort of
army-navy sweater and no makeup
and just a little
Vaseline on her eyelids.
And John Groth, the artist,
was coming to the party
and of course,
dying to meet her.
So he arrived and he
said, where's Marilyn.
I said, she's out
on the terrace.
So he went out on
the terrace and there
were some other people there.
And she was out on the terrace
talking to Dick Avedon.
And he came back and he
said, no, she's not there.
And he didn't recognize her.
Well, it's true.
She could go and be in Central
Park at the zoo, having coffee,
and if she wanted
to turn it on, she
could suddenly be Marilyn
Monroe and everybody
would recognize her.
But if she didn't want
anybody to recognize her,
she could absolutely
fade into landscape.
>> Wow.
Yes.
>> And I think it has
to happen up here,
that thing of presence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I promise this will be
the last time I embarrass you
in this interview.
But I have to tell
you this because it
gets in the way of the
conversation for me.
You are so beautiful.
You don't even have
to say anything.
Your face, you truly are a
beautiful, beautiful woman.
I wonder if beauty was important
to you, is important to you?
>> Oh, passionately important.
>> Is it?
>> Absolutely.
But what kind of beauty
are we talking about?
I'm really talking
about all beauty.
Beauty in nature, beauty in
surroundings, beauty of color,
beauty of everything.
Oh, yes, beauty
is absolutely one
of the most important
things in the world.
It's food.
>> What about personal beauty?
Like your face, as
I look at it now,
I mean, you're just exquisite.
>> Aw, Chantal, I
don't know what to say.
>> You are.
All right.
Let me do this.
>> I'm really quite overwhelmed.
>> Let's go to girl
talk right here.
Let's go to girl talk.
My mother always said
to me, no matter what,
for the rest of your
life, never go to bed
with mascara on because
that's a great beauty tip.
I never have.
I'm 53 years old--
>> Well, I think that's--
>> --don't do it.
>> --a very good tip.
>> What's your tip?
>> You mean, you're
talking physically now--
>> Yes.
>> --not any
meditation or anything?
>> Well, I'm going to get
to meditation in a minute.
But the physical tip, something
you've done all your life.
This is important to me
because I'm going to do it.
>> I don't know, I mean,
I wash my face with soap.
>> [GASP] No.
>> Yes.
>> People say you're not
supposed to wash your face with
soap.
>> I know.
Well, I do.
And I drink lots of water
which I think is important.
I don't know.
I just sort of hang in there.
>> I just sort of hang in there.
You look like this.
Was it important growing up
as an actress and a model?
>> Oh, yes.
Well, my mother, of
course, was a great beauty.
And she was an identical twin.
And they were both absolutely
the most beautiful creatures
you could imagine.
And I, of course,
wanted passionately
to merge with my mother, and
be her, and look like her,
and so forth.
>> Do you feel beautiful?
>> I think what I have works
for me, I'll put it like that.
And I've always felt that.
Whatever it is I have, it works.
I wouldn't want to look any
other way than the way I look,
not that I think it's
perfect, because I don't.
But whatever it is, it works.
>> Meditation.
That's a different
kind of thing that
contributes to beauty, because
there is a spiritual beauty as
well.
>> Yes.
>> It's a calming.
It's a centering.
What do you do?
Do you have a
mantra in your life?
>> Well, I have--
yes.
And my mantra really
is what I believe
it takes to be
successful in whatever
work you decide you want to do.
>> Can you say it for me?
>> It takes courage.
It takes believing in it.
It takes rising above it.
It takes work.
It takes me liking
you and you liking me.
It takes the dreaming
soul of the human race
that wants it to go right.
Let's never stop dreaming.
Think about it.
And one of the most important
things, I think, in all of that
is, it takes rising above it.
Because when you think
of all the things
you have to deal with when
you're in a working situation,
in any situation,
and to know what
to let go, and not
let it hold you back,
and that takes courage.
>> And with that, let's talk
about Carter for a few minutes.
>> Yes.
>> What do you do
with all of the--
what if I had said this?
What if I had done that?
What if I had just been--
>> Well, that's the terrible
thing that you live with every
day.
And you just have to again, as I
believe that things are preset,
and that I think there's
a reason that it happened,
that anything happens, and that
we don't understand it yet,
but someday we will.
And I think it's positive.
I think it's OK.
I really do.
But that torment that one puts--
I know it well.
>> I'm sure you do.
>> And it's very, very
difficult. And with time,
cliche though it is,
it does get better.
It'll be 12 years that
I lost Carter in July.
And in the beginning,
you think you're never
going to laugh again
or really live again.
But you do.
>> So you're saying that
you don't really recover,
but you laugh again,
you live again.
Do you remember the
first time you laughed--
felt something and
thought, I haven't laughed,
I haven't laughed in so long?
Do you remember coming
back into the world?
>> Slowly, but
very, very slowly.
>> Many people, when something
like this occurs in their life,
they think, I cannot
go to a support group.
I cannot--
>> I know.
Yes.
>> --talk to another person.
No one will understand.
For the people
watching this broadcast
who are in that position
now, please talk to them.
What do you say?
>> Well, I think really,
it's such a personal thing.
And some people
cannot communicate.
They're very locked
into themselves
and can't break
out of themselves
and are afraid of showing
that terrible grief and pain.
But it really makes
such a difference.
And you feel this
incredible closeness
because you're with people
you don't have to explain,
you don't have to talk.
You don't have to even say
anything if you don't want to.
I have a friend and
she lost her son.
And she sometimes goes with
me to the support group,
and she never says anything.
She just listens.
But it helps her to
be able to do that.
But if you don't feel it,
if you don't want to do it,
you shouldn't do it.
Just give it a try, maybe
once, to see if it would work.
>> That's the best advice in
the world-- just go once--
>> Once.
>> --what can it hurt?
>> And also, you can go
and after five minutes,
you can just get up and leave.
There's no pressure
at a support group.
There's no feeling of, it's
going to be silly if I get up
and walk away.
It's not like that at all.
You can just do
anything that you want.
>> Did you ever go through
a period of, it's my fault?
>> No.
Never.
>> That's so good.
I think so many people--
>> No.
No, that, I never did.
>> It must be of great comfort
to you to know that Carter knew
and was sure that he was loved.
>> Oh, yes.
And I know he loved me too.
>> He fell 14 stories.
Sometimes, you write, you
stand outside a building
and you count 14 stories up.
Why do you do that?
Is it--
>> Because I think it's very
important to go over it again,
and again, and again, and again.
That's the only way that
you come to assuage pain.
And I think it's
important to do that.
I know some people,
they want to forget it
and they don't want
to deal with it.
But that is not the way
I have chosen to do it.
>> I understand
exactly why you do it.
For me, it would be a way
of putting chaos into order.
>> Yes.
>> It would be a way of
wrapping my head around it.
>> Yes, I go over it a lot
again, and again, and again.
I even, like a movie,
play it backwards.
I did that a lot, actually,
in the very beginning.
And then when it was happening--
because he didn't jump,
he was holding on to the--
>> Hanging onto the ledge.
>> --ledge, and for a minute,
I thought he was going to come
back again--
and as it was happening, I saw--
it was as if I went
up into the sky
and was looking
down on the balcony
with two people on the balcony.
And I've heard that,
actually, that's
a rather common
thing when somebody's
in an accident or
something, you get a sort
of out of body experience.
But and I go over the
whole thing a lot.
And I think it's
important to do it.
>> Is there a passage,
something you read,
something that
gives you comfort,
something that you read
over and over again?
>> Oh, well, there's one
thing from Willa Cather's "My
ntonia," which, it actually,
it applies to what we're talking
about, but it's how I
imagine death to be.
And I'll read it
to you, shall I?
>> I would love for
you to read it to me.
>> "I kept as still as I
could, nothing happened.
I did not expect
anything to happen.
I was something that lay
under the sun and felt it,
like the pumpkin.
And I didn't not
want to be anymore.
I was entirely happy.
Perhaps we feel like that
when we die and become
part of something
entire, whether it
is sun and air, or
goodness and knowledge.
At any rate, that is happiness,
to be dissolved into something
complete and great.
When it comes to one, it
comes as naturally as sleep."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Gloria Vanderbilt did
not know love as a child.
Her father died when
she was an infant.
>> The famous Mrs. Gloria
Vanderbilt arrives in her
chariot as the sun goddess.
Her globetrotting mother
cared more for parties
and left her in the company
of a cold and aloof aunt
who became her legal guardian.
But Gloria has known love as
an adult, and plenty of it--
romances with Howard
Hughes and Frank Sinatra,
marriages to charismatic
conductor Leopold Stokowski,
40 years her senior,
director Sidney Lumet,
who she met while acting
in the New York stage
version of "Picnic."
And finally, when
she was in her 40s,
screenwriter Wyatt Cooper,
who she calls her great love.
>> You have been in your life,
as I read all of your books,
and as I've followed your
life for quite some time,
you have been with some of
the most remarkable men.
Wyatt Cooper.
>> What amazing
parent he was, Wyatt.
>> Was he a wonderful father?
>> Oh, certainly.
Showed me what it would
be like to have a father,
the way he was with
Carter and Anderson.
>> How wonderful that you
married a man who's a wonderful
father when your father was not.
>> I know.
>> And you know, he and
Carter were so close.
And after Carter died,
I thought it was as if--
I don't know how to explain it--
but I was so happy
that, if it had
to be that it was me there
instead of him, because he
couldn't have survived it.
He couldn't have.
>> Sidney Lumet?
>> Oh, Sydney's wonderful, yes.
The warmest, most passionate,
generous, spirited, person.
I love him dearly.
>> Remarkable man, Sidney.
>> Leopold?
>> Well, he was a
genius, is a genius.
And geniuses are not
easy to live with.
>> I imagine he was not.
>> But I was just
crazy about him.
>> You know, they say that there
is a common thread in the men
we love.
Even though their personalities
may be very different,
there's a common
denominator, aside from you,
of course, that they have.
What was a quality,
do you think,
that all the men
you've loved have had?
>> Well, they were
all so different.
I don't know.
I mean, I can't find it, except
that they loved me a lot, which
is a thread, I guess.
>> That's a lovely thread.
Someone once said,
it's very important
to have a man love you a little
bit more than you love him.
>> Oh, I don't
think that's true.
>> Do you think that's true?
>> I think all love,
even if it's unrequited,
even if it's all--
I wouldn't miss
it for the world.
>> When you write about Wyatt,
you say he was the one true
real love.
How do you know when
love is the real love?
What does it feel like?
>> Well, of course, you
do think that every love,
or you hope every
love, is the real love.
So and you can't know until
you've met the other love.
You know what I mean.
>> Yes.
Yes.
At the time, he's the one.
>> At the time, he's the one.
Yes.
>> He may not be Mr. Right,
but he's Mr. Right now.
>> Absolutely.
Yes.
But my marriage to Wyatt was
the most steady and real.
And I would be married to
him today if he hadn't died.
>> The other day I was with
a group of girlfriends and we
were talking about
when we date men,
there are certain
non-negotiables we have.
And by non-negotiables, we
mean there's just a few things
that there's no arguing about.
For me is, you can't smoke
and you've got to love dogs.
Those are the two
non-negotiables for me.
What would be
non-negotiables for you?
>> Well, smoking would
certainly be one.
>> What about a
man who's stingy?
>> Well, stinginess
I cannot hate--
I mean, I really hate it.
And it has nothing
to do with somebody
whether they have money or not.
It's a certain
generosity of spirit.
And I think a lot of men
who do have a lot of money
are very stingy.
And I can't stand it.
>> Let's talk about a
very important topic.
Let's talk about friendships.
>> Well, I have the most
intense friendships with--
I have about 10 women friends.
And I'm so blessed
because I trust them.
They trust me.
I'd do anything in
the world for them.
And I know they would for me.
I trust women much more
than I do men, which I think
is probably because I was
brought up by women, really.
And I haven't a clue about men.
I really don't.
I haven't a clue.
And I have four boys, was
meant to have daughters.
But anyway, it's worked out OK.
But I haven't got a clue.
>> I wonder if we'll ever
really understand men?
>> And I think they probably
are as sensitive as we are,
only I don't know, I find it--
it's another territory.
It's another country, you know?
>> Yes, it is.
I've always believed
men are another tribe.
>> Absolutely.
>> They are another tribe.
>> But they feel that
way about us, so--
>> Yes.
And they're entitled.
I have a bold question.
There was a time when you were
friends with Truman Capote.
>> Yes.
>> People have said over the
years that he was a mean man.
Was he-- would you?
>> Well, Truman, what happened
to Truman in the beginning,
I knew him when we
were both like 18.
And what happened to Truman
is he got into the drugs.
And that's what did it to him.
He was a drug addict, got to be.
And then he completely changed.
And I think he was mean.
And I didn't see him at all
in the last years of his life
because he was--
well, I didn't trust him.
And I just think he did
really betrayed, really,
his real friends
like Babe Paley and--
>> Slim Keith.
>> Slim Keith, yeah.
>> You came out
of that unscathed,
as I read about
that over the years.
And I wondered if it was just
that you were wise enough
to step away.
>> Oh, well, I never, ever--
I never confided him in anything
that I wouldn't want everybody
to know about, because he
was a brilliant gossip.
And he also, he said
to me once, if you
want to repeat something,
gossip about somebody,
he said, and you
want to make it up.
You have to take just a little
grain of truth about the person
so that when you
tell the rest of it,
they're going to believe it.
That was the way
his mind worked.
And I never, ever trusted him.
He was a wonderful companion
and great fun to be with,
but not to confide in.
>> What made you wake
up one morning and say,
I think I'll do jeans?
>> Well, that was when
I was in the design--
and I started out in home
furnishings, designing.
The first fashion thing
I did was scarves, which
were done for my paintings.
And from that, I went
into my own business
on 7th Avenue, a
couture business.
And from that, one of
my licenses was jeans.
It really took off, very big.
>> Do you miss that world?
>> No, not at all.
No, I'm out of the business
completely, happily, yes.
No, I really don't.
The best thing about
it was making a lot
of money, which is always nice.
But when you're
in that business,
you really don't have
time to write or to paint.
It's just another
mechanism, it's
another thing that's going on.
>> Why do I get the feeling
that making a lot of money,
to use that phrase, is not as
important to you right now as I
sit here with you?
>> Look, the only good thing
about making money is it gives
you independence,
that's what it does.
And that's the best
thing about it.
This is a red tableau.
And it's a thanks
to the divine mother
for saving a child's life.
>> Ever the independent
spirit, Gloria, now in her 70s,
is entering a new phase in her
artwork with box sculptures.
>> What one relates to is
absolutely connected with
one's childhood because that's
the way the story of it all
comes together.
>> Somewhat abstract, but
always containing kernels
of the autobiographical.
>> One of the themes I notice
in a lot of your artwork is
the divine mother.
And you speak of her a lot.
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> Why is that important?
>> For Gloria, her life is
never far from her work.
>> The divine mother has more
reality to me than a male
image, than a male figure.
And I think also that if you've
always longed for a mother,
and searched for
a mother, it is as
if you have a mother,
if you pray to her
or feel connected to her.
>> I believe that
there are no endings.
I believe that there
are beginnings.
>> Yes.
>> Every day, there's
a new beginning.
Every day, there's a new
chapter in our lives.
So I ask you as we
close this conversation,
what are you beginning?
What do you begin in this
chapter of your life?
Where are you going?
What are you doing?
What are you beginning?
>> I have no idea.
>> Really?
>> It's going to be a surprise.
>> Isn't it funny, you
have a preconceived notion,
I thought you would say,
well, I'm doing this and that.
And I suppose it's
better in life
to say, put it in front of me.
Is that what you mean?
>> Well, I really learned after
Carter's death that you just
don't know.
You don't know.
And you wake up with hope, and
love, and passion in your heart
and hope for the best.
>> You know, the best compliment
that I think one woman can give
another woman is not I love your
shoes, I love your lipstick,
who did your hair?
I think the best compliment one
woman can give another woman is
to say, I want to be like you.
I want to have the
qualities that you have.
And I say that to you.
>> Oh, Chantal, really, it's--
>> I do.
Thank you for this
lovely conversation.
>> Sweetheart.
>> You are delightful.
>> Thank you.
Thank you, sweetheart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]